Add dev-environment.md (#280)
canonical/hardware-observer-operator: dev-environment.md

If you have a physical machine that you can fully take over and expect to redeploy when you're done, you can follow these steps to set up the environment.

## Prerequisites
A physical machine. Here, "physical machine" refers to machines that are not VMs or containers and have access to real
hardware resources like RAID cards and BMC management tools.

A juju controller. You can find what is juju and how to deploy it [here](https://juju.is/docs/juju)

## Set up juju and lxd and deploy hardware-observer
First, you need to bootstrap a Juju controller on the machine. Using a default LXD controller should suffice.

### Extra requirements
Due to some [historical reasons](https://bugs.launchpad.net/juju/+bug/1964513), the machine hosting the LXD controller cannot be added to the model unless the default LXD bridge is renamed.
```
lxc network create br0 -t bridge
lxc profile edit default  # Rename lxdbr0 to br0 in the profile
lxc network delete lxdbr0
```

Bootstrap a LXD controller on juju:
```
juju bootstrap localhost lxd-controller
```

### Add physical machine

> To add the physical machine to the model, you need to allow the juju client to log into it via SSH:

Reviewer: iirc you can only add a machine if the juju client can then elevate its privileges
```suggestion
To add the physical machine to the model, you need to allow the juju client to log into it via SSH as a user with sudo rights. On an Ubuntu machine, the `ubuntu` user typically satisfies this requirement:
```

```
cat ~/.local/share/juju/ssh/juju_id_rsa.pub >> ~/.ssh/authorized_keys
```

> Then you can manually add physical machine, switch to the controller you just created and run:

Reviewer: suggestion:
```suggestion
Now you can create a model and add your physical machine via the manual provider:
```

```
juju add-model hw-obs

> juju add-machine ssh:<username>@ip.add.re.ss

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# use a different username if needed 
# any IP belonging to the host should work  
juju add-machine ssh:ubuntu@ip.add.re.ss
```

```

### Deploy Hardware-Observer
Create a new model and deploy hardware-observer along with the necessary agents:
```

> juju add-model hw-obs

Reviewer: no longer necessary given line 40

juju switch hw-obs
juju deploy ubuntu --to 0
juju deploy hardware-observer
juju deploy grafana-agent
```

Add necessary relations:
```
juju relate hardware-observer ubuntu
juju relate grafana-agent ubuntu
juju relate grafana-agent hardware-observer
```

## Set up microk8s and COS
### Set up microk8s

> Install MicroK8s package, it is recommanded to use a strictly confined version:

Reviewer: I'm curious, why? Especially since this is a dev environment

Reviewer 2: I believe this is actually a requirement - latest juju will refuse to bootstrap on a non-strictly confined microk8s.

Author: As https://github.com/canonical/bundle-kubeflow/issues/830 reports, juju 3.x requires Microk8s snap install in strictly confinement. I have changed it to "required".

```
sudo snap install microk8s --channel 1.30-strict
```

Add your user to the `microk8s` group for unprivileged access:
```
sudo adduser $USER snap_microk8s
```

Give your user permissions to read the ~/.kube directory:
```

> sudo chown -f -R $USER ~/.kube

Reviewer: interesting, wouldn't you already be able to read `~/.kube` since it's in your own home?

Author: Not sure how it works but if I don't give permission I will have to use `sudo` on the rollout command.

```

Wait for MicroK8s to finish initialising:
```
sudo microk8s status --wait-ready
```

Enable the 'storage' and 'dns' addons:
```
sudo microk8s enable hostpath-storage dns
```

The COS bundle comes with Traefik to provide ingress, for which the metallb addon should be enabled:
```

> IPADDR=$(ip -4 -j route get 2.2.2.2 | jq -r '.[] | .prefsrc')

Reviewer: interesting trick, is this to fetch the src of the default route? Because if that's the case going for `2.2.2.2` isn't strictly necessary

sudo microk8s enable metallb:$IPADDR-$IPADDR
```

Alias kubectl so it interacts with MicroK8s by default:
```
sudo snap alias microk8s.kubectl kubectl
```

Ensure your new group membership is apparent in the current terminal:
(Not required once you have logged out and back in again)
```
newgrp snap_microk8s
```

Juju recognises a local MicroK8s cloud automatically, bootstrap a microk8s controller:
```
juju bootstrap microk8s dev-controller
```

### Integrate with COS

> Before deploy COS bundle, wait for all the microk8s addons to be rolled out:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before deploying the COS bundle, wait for all the microk8s addons to be rolled out:
```

```
microk8s kubectl rollout status deployments/hostpath-provisioner -n kube-system -w
microk8s kubectl rollout status deployments/coredns -n kube-system -w
microk8s kubectl rollout status daemonset.apps/speaker -n metallb-system -w
```

> Create model and deploy COS-lite bundle:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a COS model and deploy COS-lite bundle:
```

```
juju add-model cos
juju switch cos
curl -L https://raw.githubusercontent.com/canonical/cos-lite-bundle/main/overlays/offers-overlay.yaml -O
juju deploy cos-lite --trust --overlay ./offers-overlay.yaml
```

> Switch to lxd-controller and add necessary relations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Switch back to your physical model and add the relations to COS:
```

I guess? You'd also need to show the `juju switch hw-obs` command

If you have a physical machine that you can fully take over and expect to redeploy when you're done, you can follow these steps to set up the environment.

## Prerequisites
A physical machine. Here, "physical machine" refers to machines that are not VMs or containers and have access to real
hardware resources like RAID cards and BMC management tools.

A juju controller. You can find what is juju and how to deploy it [here](https://juju.is/docs/juju)

## Set up juju and lxd and deploy hardware-observer
First, you need to bootstrap a Juju controller on the machine. Using a default LXD controller should suffice.

### Extra requirements
Due to some [historical reasons](https://bugs.launchpad.net/juju/+bug/1964513), the machine hosting the LXD controller cannot be added to the model unless the default LXD bridge is renamed.
```
lxc network create br0 -t bridge
lxc profile edit default  # Rename lxdbr0 to br0 in the profile
lxc network delete lxdbr0
```

Bootstrap a LXD controller on juju:
```
juju bootstrap localhost lxd-controller
```

### Add physical machine

> To add the physical machine to the model, you need to allow the juju client to log into it via SSH as a user with sudo rights. On an Ubuntu machine, the `ubuntu` user typically satisfies this requirement:

Reviewer 3: **suggestion:** 

Can you add a description it's juju controller on LXD cloud and machine is added manually? And why we choose LXD cloud to bootstrap the controller?

More to ask, are you sure it's working always? As I remember, if you adding machine using `juju add-machine ssh:xxxxxx`, the machine will try to send request to juju controller to register itself. The LXD juju controller may have issue that the machine can't connect to the controller.

Reviewer: I think we could reduce the risk of connectivity issues by asking users to use the lxd bridge address for the physical host. So something like

```
BR0_ADDR=$(ip -4 -j a sho dev br0 | jq -r .[].addr_info[0].local)
juju add-machine ssh:ubuntu@$BR0_ADDR
```

Author: Updated this comment with LXD description. Also added the reason of using LXD at line 17.

```
sudo snap install microk8s --channel 1.30-strict
```

Add your user to the `microk8s` group for unprivileged access:
```
sudo adduser $USER snap_microk8s
```

Give your user permissions to read the ~/.kube directory:
```
sudo chown -f -R $USER ~/.kube
```

Wait for MicroK8s to finish initialising:
```
sudo microk8s status --wait-ready
```

Enable the 'storage' and 'dns' addons:
```
sudo microk8s enable hostpath-storage dns
```

The COS bundle comes with Traefik to provide ingress, for which the metallb addon should be enabled:
```
# The IP address 2.2.2.2 is arbitrary and is used to determine the preferred source IP address for routing.
IPADDR=$(ip -4 -j route get 2.2.2.2 | jq -r '.[] | .prefsrc')
sudo microk8s enable metallb:$IPADDR-$IPADDR
```

Alias kubectl so it interacts with MicroK8s by default:
```
sudo snap alias microk8s.kubectl kubectl
```

Ensure your new group membership is apparent in the current terminal:
(Not required once you have logged out and back in again)
```
newgrp snap_microk8s
```

Juju recognises a local MicroK8s cloud automatically, bootstrap a microk8s controller:
```
juju bootstrap microk8s k8s-controller

> ```

Reviewer 3: **suggestion:** 

As I understand, it's a two controllers setup. How do you make sure the connection to juju controller is working?

Do you need more config to bootstrap?

```
juju bootstrap microk8s k8s-controller --debug --config controller-service-type=loadbalancer --config controller-external-ips=[10.11.12.13]
```

Author: I've tested this command on both local and Testflinger environments, and it consistently worked well. Given that this is intended for a general setup guide, I think maybe we can keep the command as it is?

lxc network delete lxdbr0
```

Bootstrap a LXD controller on juju:
```
juju bootstrap localhost lxd-controller
```

### Add physical machine
To add the physical machine to the model, which is managed by a Juju controller on an LXD cloud, you need to allow the juju client to log into it via SSH as a user with sudo rights. On an Ubuntu machine, the `ubuntu` user typically satisfies this requirement:
```
cat ~/.local/share/juju/ssh/juju_id_rsa.pub >> ~/.ssh/authorized_keys
```

Now you can create a model and add your physical machine via the manual provider:
```
juju add-model hw-obs
# Use a different username if needed 
# It is recommended to use the IP address of br0 for more reliable operation
BR0_ADDR=$(ip -4 -j a sho dev br0 | jq -r .[].addr_info[0].local)
juju add-machine ssh:ubuntu@$BR0_ADDR
```

### Deploy Hardware-Observer
```
juju switch hw-obs
juju deploy ubuntu --to 0
juju deploy hardware-observer
juju deploy grafana-agent
```

Add necessary relations:
```
juju relate hardware-observer ubuntu
juju relate grafana-agent ubuntu
juju relate grafana-agent hardware-observer
```

## Set up microk8s and COS
### Set up microk8s

> Set up microk8s. Steps can be found in this [guide](https://juju.is/docs/sdk/dev-setup?_gl=1*nsqfdk*_ga*MjEzOTcxMzA2OS4xNzEwMzYzNDU0*_ga_5LTL1CNEJM*MTcyMjI5NDE2MC4xMDMuMS4xNzIyMjk0MTY4LjUyLjAuMA..#heading--manual-set-up-your-cloud).

Reviewer 2: Please remove unecessary url params:

```suggestion
Set up microk8s. Steps can be found in this [guide](https://juju.is/docs/sdk/dev-setup#heading--manual-set-up-your-cloud).
```

# Deploy hardware-observer with COS on real machine

> This guide outlines the steps to deploy the hardware-observer and COS on physical machine.

Reviewer: I think it'd be worth explaining that we're proposing an unusual topology and why. In a normal production scenario there's no need for anything more complex than 1. have a controller, 2. deploy hardware observer on a physical machine, 3. connect to an existing COS. For example:
```
Most of hardware observer's functionality can only be experienced when installing the charm on server-grade hardware and relating to a COS installation. As this can be a relatively expensive setup, we are offering this guide to document how to create an environment for development or rapid prototyping on a single physical host. Note that the proposed topology is in no way appropriate for production, nor it can be considered a supported deployment.
```

## Prerequisites
A physical machine. Here, "physical machine" refers to machines that are not VMs or containers and have access to real
hardware resources like RAID cards and BMC management tools.

A juju controller. You can find what is juju and how to deploy it [here](https://juju.is/docs/juju)

## Set up juju and lxd and deploy hardware-observer
First, you need to bootstrap a Juju controller on the machine. Using a default LXD controller should suffice.

> ### Extra requirements if using juju controller on LXD

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Extra requirements
```
I think we should be specific: this is _our_ proposed dev environment setup. No need to have ifs and buts.

> Due to some [historical reasons](https://bugs.launchpad.net/juju/+bug/1964513), the default bridge for LXD does not work.
> If you try to add a local machine to the LXD controller. You will need to create a new bridge:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Due to some [historical reasons](https://bugs.launchpad.net/juju/+bug/1964513), the machine hosting the LXD controller cannot be added to the model unless the default LXD bridge is renamed.
```

```
lxc network create br0 -t bridge
lxc profile edit default  # Rename lxdbr0 to br0 in the profile
lxc network delete lxdbr0
```

### Add physical machine

> If you have a physical machine that you can fully take over and expect to redeploy when you're done, you can follow these steps to add it to juju.

Reviewer: maybe move this suggestion to the opening paragraph as a disclaimer? This would allows you to be more prescriptive here and simplify

> To add physical machine to the controller, you need to pass the juju client credential to it:

Reviewer: 'pass' is rather vague
```suggestion
To add the physical machine to the model, you need to allow the juju client to log into it via SSH:
```

```
cat ~/.local/share/juju/ssh/juju_id_rsa.pub >> ~/.ssh/authorized_keys
```

Then you can manually add physical machine:
```

> juju add-machine ssh:<username>@ip.add.re.ss

Reviewer: is this right? shouldn't we create the model first? this command may add the new machine to the controller model if it's the only one

```

### Deploy Hardware-Observer
Create a new model and deploy hardware-observer along with the necessary agents:
```
juju add-model hw-obs
juju deploy ubuntu --to 0
juju deploy hardware-observer
juju deploy grafana-agent
```

Add necessary relations:
```
juju relate hardware-observer ubuntu
juju relate grafana-agent ubuntu
juju relate grafana-agent hardware-observer
```

## Set up microk8s and COS

> To integrate hardware-observer with COS, you can follow this [guide](https://charmhub.io/hardware-observer/docs/integrate-with-cos)

Reviewer: eh, I'm generally ok with referencing other docs instead of copypasting but I think this is too much: the reader would need to click on this link, then click on https://juju.is/docs/sdk/dev-setup (it's the first sentence in the referenced document), then... wonder what they actually want or need.

I think this document should be very opinionated: "here is how to set up a simple dev environment on a single machine. Do this, then this, then this". While some of those steps may be held in other pages, I think we should be careful to only reference specific blocks of code that don't include if statements.

Or to use diataxis parlance, it looks to me like we're mixing tutorials with explanations here.

## Check the dashboard
Go to COS model and run:
```
juju run grafana/0 get-admin-password
```

This command will show the grafana dashboard endpoint and default password.  The default username is "admin".

> Now you should be able to access to grafana.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you should be able to access grafana.
```

## Set up microk8s and COS
### Set up microk8s

> Set up microk8. Steps can be found in this [guide](https://juju.is/docs/sdk/dev-setup?_gl=1*nsqfdk*_ga*MjEzOTcxMzA2OS4xNzEwMzYzNDU0*_ga_5LTL1CNEJM*MTcyMjI5NDE2MC4xMDMuMS4xNzIyMjk0MTY4LjUyLjAuMA..).

Reviewer: is this link correct? It simply sends me to the juju dev environment setup page.
And why the complex URL parameters?

Reviewer: oh and s/microk8/microk8s/

Author: The MicroK8s setup instructions is under the Juju development environment setup page. I've updated the link to point directly to the relevant section.
